This painting depicts the capture of Fort Mirtha in North-West India near Jodpur.
It was captured by the Mughal forces and led by Mirza Sharaf ud-Din Hussain in 1561.
Shàh Bidgàh Khán and his son along with other nobles assisted Mirza Sharafu ud- Din Hussain in the capturing of fort Mirtha during Akbars reign.
Once the nobles had reached the fort they thought that the conquest of the fort would be easy but instead they encountered some difficulties as the Rajputs put up a fight.
When the imperial army realized that the capture would not be easy they decided to be smart about their attack and plan it out.
By not acting recklessly they hoped to eliminate any casualities that may occur during the capture of  fort Mirtha.
Mirza Sharafu ud- Din Hussain surrounded the fort and they placed a mine under one of the main towers.
They filled the mine with gunpowder and set fire to it. BOOM! The tower erupted in flames!
The fortress was then surrendered and it was mutually agreed that the garrison would leave with their horses and arms but leave all of their property and possessions.
Originally there had been a peaceful agreement in regards to the capture and handing over of fort Mirtha.
However, when the soldiers went to take possession of the fort Deo-dás, a Rajput, set fire to his property which was in the fortress.
He set fire to his property to demonstrate his resistant to the surrendering of the fort.
After Deo-dás set the fire he fled only to be pursued by the imperial army.
Quite recklessly he all of a sudden turned around and begin to engage in battle with Hussain and his nobles.
This battle scene is Deo-dás and the Rájpúts attacking the royal army.
It was a bloody battle full of chaos as demonstrated in the painting because it was so unexpected.
Many royal soldiers as well as Ràjpúts lost their lives including Deo-dás. He was thrown off his horse and then cut to pieces by the imperial forces.
The royal army are the ones who are fighting wearing the gold like helmets while the Ràjpúts are mostly wearing white turbans.
There are many horses depicted as horses were a common choice of animal for battle
as they allowed their riders to engage in fast moving and smoother battle compare to those on foot or other forms of transportation.
When the Muslims established the Mughal Empire they also brought with them alternate military beliefs that differed from the old ways.
They relied on their horses and fought in a cavalry way.
This painting also depicts the use of swords, shields and spears by both fighting parties.
These weapons were extremely popular during this era under Akbars reign.
In the end Mirza Sharafu ud- Din Hussain gained control of the fort and proudly accomplished his goal of its conquest.
“In short, the other Rajputs escaped half-dead from the battlefield
“In short, the other Rajputs escaped half-dead from that battlefield
and the fortress of Mirtha together with all its territory came into the possession of the imperial servants and was included among the dominions".